I bring with me on the train from London... a message from Westminster. No. No, no, no, not a message. Not a message. An instruction, in fact. You must be silent. You must say nothing. Say nothing about the present situation in this city. Say nothing about hunger. Say nothing about jobs. Say nothing about pay. But those in greener pastures, they may speak. They may raise their voices. But here in the smoke, you men and women, Irish and Italian and English who support the Socialist cause... And even your socialist cats and dogs and canaries. ..you must hush. Because the King, and all the King's horses and all the King's men want you to be silent. But it is you, my friends, who must suffer the cuts in wages and in welfare and in dignity. And you must not complain, because that would be unpatriotic. You soldiers, who have fought in France, you are traitors if you speak up. You veterans of their wars and their booms and their busts, it is you who must take the blows, and carry the burdens for the sake of those in greener pastures who bellow at you "silence". Well, watch this, comrades. I will not be silent. Not this Englishman. No silence from me. No silence from me, because I have heard your voices when you come to me and tell me about the cries of your hungry children, and I will gather up every single one of those cries and I will take 'em with me on the train to Westminster and I will let them out of the bag in the House of Commons, and let them try to silence that, eh? Shouldn't that involve some sharing of the burden? All of us taking a smaller slice of the cake, eh? After all, it's bloody us who bakes the cake and makes the cars and melts the metal. And the King, remember him, the man who ordered all of this, shouldn't he be taking some of the cuts? Eh, some of the blows? Some of the pain? No or yes? Hush. Hush, you working men and women. Silence. Good. Save your voices. You are going to need them on Saturday when we rally together at the Bull Ring Market and together, we'll raise the roof, we'll break the damned silence and bring down this broken government.
